In cities, vegetation temperature is important for quantifying water use, microclimates, and water and energy fluxes, as demonstrated by urban climate models and in situ studies.
Remote sensing is capable of observing land surface temperatures (LST) across a city; however, its ability to quantify vegetation canopy temperatures is limited because of LST variability resulting from urban surface heterogeneity, differences in vegetation fraction and non-vegetated material, and the coarse resolution of available thermal imagery.
This study is a large-scale analysis of urban surface composition and temperature variability across the Los Angeles, USA, metropolitan area (4466 km(2)).
Sub-pixel fractions of two plant functional types (tree and turfgrass) and four urban materials (impervious surface, commercial roof, non-photosynthetic vegetation, and soil) were quantified using hyperspectral imagery (Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer).
Fractional cover gradients of plant types and non-vegetated materials were developed using 1.7 million pixels, from which we modeled LST changes using simultaneously collected thermal imagery (MODIS-ASTER Airborne Simulator).
Vegetation LST variability was mapped by subtracting modeled LST from observed LST and investigated relative to building density and vegetation management.
Overall, LST varied significantly among plant functional types and urban material types.
Across heterogeneous mixtures, LST and vegetation fraction exhibited a negative, linear relationship, with the slopes of LST change showing significant differences between trees and turfgrass.
The map of vegetation LST variability had a standard deviation of 3.5 degrees C, indicating significant variability across Los Angeles independent of vegetation type or fractional cover.
Building density was observed to affect tree and turfgrass LST differently, while a negative relationship was observed between vegetation LST and irrigation (R-2 = 0.55).
Our results show that an LST signal of vegetation function, distinct from that of vegetation fractional cover, can be observed and modeled at city-scales in fractional mixture analysis, indicating potential for improved understanding of urban microclimates.
