Evaporation (E) and transpiration (T) information is crucial for precise water resources planning and management in arid and semiarid areas.
Two-source energy balance (TSEB) methods based on remotely-sensed land surface temperature provide an important modeling approach for estimating evapotranspiration (ET) and its components of E and T.
Approaches for accurate decomposition of the component temperature and E/T partitioning from ET based on TSEB requires careful investigation.
In this study, three TSEB models are used: (i) the TSEB model with the Priestley-Taylor equation, i.e., TSEB-PT; (ii) the TSEB model using the Penman-Monteith equation, i.e., TSEB-PM, and (iii) the TSEB using component temperatures derived from vegetation fractional cover and land surface temperature (VFC/LST) space, i.e., TSEB-T-C-T-S.
These models are employed to investigate the impact of component temperature decomposition on E/T partitioning accuracy.
Validation was conducted in the large-scale campaign of Heihe Watershed Allied Telemetry Experimental Research-Multi-Scale Observation Experiment on Evapotranspiration (HiWATER-MUSOEXE) in the northwest of China, and results showed that root mean square errors (RMSEs) of latent and sensible heat fluxes were respectively lower than 76 W/m(2) and 50 W/m(2) for all three approaches.
Based on the measurements from the stable oxygen and hydrogen isotopes system at the Daman superstation, it was found that all three models slightly overestimated the ratio of E/ET.
In addition, discrepancies in E/T partitioning among the three models were observed in the kernel experimental area of MUSOEXE.
Further intercomparison indicated that different temperature decomposition methods were responsible for the observed discrepancies in E/T partitioning.
The iterative procedure adopted by TSEB-PT and TSEB-PM produced higher LEC and lower T-C when compared to TSEB-T-C-T-S.
Overall, this work provides valuable insights into understanding the performances of TSEB models with different temperature decomposition mechanisms over semiarid regions.
