Structure from Motion (SfM) represents a good low-cost alternative to generate high resolution topography where LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) data is scarce or unaffordable.
In this work, we demonstrate the advantages of high resolution elevation models (DEM) obtained using the SfM technique to delineate catchment boundaries and the stream network.
The SfM-based DEM was compared with LiDAR data, distributed by the Mexican Government, and a previous high resolution topographic map generated by a RTK-GPS system.
Aerial images were collected on a forested ecohydrological monitoring site in northwest Mexico using a commercial grade digital camera attached to a tethered helium balloon.
Here we applied the SfM method with the removal of the vegetation, similarly to the more advance LiDAR methods.
This was achieved by adjusting the point cloud classification parameters (maximum angle, maximum distance and cell size), which to our knowledge, has not has not been reported in the available SfM literature.
The SfM terrain model showed minimal differences in ground elevation in the center of the image domain (0-0.5 m) while errors increased on the edges of the domain.
The SfM model generated the largest catchment area, main and total channel length (1.07 ha, 106.1 and 223 m, respectively) while LiDAR model obtained the smallest area and main channel length (0.77 ha and 92.9 m, respectively).
On the other hand, the SfM model had a better and accurate representation of the river network among all models evaluated due to its closest proximity to the observed GPS-tracked main channel.
We concluded that the integration of low cost unmanned aerial vehicles and the SEM method is a good alternative to estimate hydro-morphological attributes in small catchments.
Furthermore, we found that high resolution SfM-based terrain models had a fairly good representation of small catchments which is useful in regions with limited data availability.
The main findings of this research provide scientific value within the field of hydrological remote sensing in particular in the acquisition of high resolution topography in remote areas without access to more expensive LiDAR or survey techniques.
High resolution DEMs allow for a better characterization of catchment area size and stream network delineation which influence hydrological processes (i.e. soil moisture redistribution, runoff, ET).
