Depending on the band position on the electromagnetic spectrum, optical and electronic characteristics, sensors collect the reflected energy by the Earth's surface and the atmosphere.
Currently, the availability of the new generation of medium resolution, such as the Multi-Spectral Instrument (MSI) on board the Sentinel-2 satellite, offers new opportunities for long-term high-temporal frequency for Earth's surfaces observation and monitoring.
This paper focuses on the analysis and the comparison of the visible, the near-infrared (VNIR), and the shortwave infrared (SWIR) spectral bands of the MSI for soil salinity discrimination in an arid landscape.
To achieve these, a field campaign was organized, and 160 soil samples were collected with various degrees of soil salinity, including non-saline soil samples.
The bidirectional reflectance factor was measured above each soil sample in a goniometric laboratory using an ASD (Analytical Spectral Devices) spectroradiometer.
In the laboratory work, pHs, electrical conductivity (EC-(Lab)), and the major soluble cations (Na+, K+, Ca2++, and Mg2+) and anions (CO32-, HCO3-, Cl-, and SO42-) were measured using extraction from a saturated soil paste, and the sodium adsorption ratio (SAR) was calculated using a standard procedure.
These parameters, in addition to the field observations, were used to interpret and investigate the spectroradiometric measurements and their relevant transformations using the continuum removed reflectance spectrum (CRRS) and the first derivative (FD).
Moreover, the acquired spectra over all the soil samples were resampled and convolved in the solar-reflective spectral bands using the Canadian Modified Herman transfer radiative code (CAM5S) and the relative spectral response profiles characterizing the Sentinel-MSI band filters.
The statistical analyses conducted were based on the second-order polynomial regression (p < 0.05) between the measured EC-(Lab) and the reflectances in the MSI convolved spectral bands.
The results obtained indicate the limitation of VNIR bands and the potential of SWIR domain for soil salinity classes' discrimination.
The CRRS and the FD analyses highlighted a serious spectral-signal confusion between the salt and the soil optical properties (i.e., color and brightness) in the VNIR bands.
Likewise, the results stressed the independence of the SWIR domain vis-a-vis these soil artifacts and its capability to differentiate significantly among several soil salinity classes.
Moreover, the statistical fit between each MSI individual spectral band and EC-(Lab) corroborates this trend, which revealed that only the SWIR bands were correlated significantly (R-2 of 50% and 64%, for SWIR-1 and SWIR-2, respectively), while the R-2 between the VNIR bands and EC-(Lab) remains less than 9%.
According to the convergence of these four independent analysis methods, it is concluded that the Sentinel-MSI SWIR bands are excellent candidates for an integration in soil salinity modeling and monitoring at local, regional, and global scales.
