The worst forest fire in South Korea occurred in April 2000 on the eastern coast.
Forest recovery works were conducted until 2005, and the forest has been monitored since the fire.
Remote sensing techniques have been used to detect the burned areas and to evaluate the recovery-time point of the post-fire processes during the past 18 years.
We used three indices, Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR), Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), and Gross Primary Production (GPP), to temporally monitor a burned area in terms of its moisture condition, vegetation biomass, and photosynthetic activity, respectively.
The change of those three indices by forest recovery processes was relatively analyzed using an unburned reference area.
The selected unburned area had similar characteristics to the burned area prior to the forest fire.
The temporal patterns of NBR and NDVI, not only showed the forest recovery process as a result of forest management, but also statistically distinguished the recovery periods at the regions of low, moderate, and high fire severity.
The NBR2.1 for all areas, calculated using 2.1 m wavelengths, reached the unburned state in 2008.
The NDVI for areas with low and moderate fire severity levels became significantly equal to the unburned state in 2009 (p > 0.05), but areas with high severity levels did not reach the unburned state until 2017.
This indicated that the surface and vegetation moisture conditions recovered to the unburned state about 8 years after the fire event, while vegetation biomass and health required a longer time to recover, particularly for high severity regions.
In the case of GPP, it rapidly recovered after about 3 years.
Then, the steady increase in GPP surpassed the GPP of the reference area in 2015 because of the rapid growth and high photosynthetic activity of young forests.
Therefore, the concluding scientific message is that, because the recovery-time point for each component of the forest ecosystem is different, using only one satellite-based indicator will not be suitable to understand the post-fire recovery process.
NBR, NDVI, and GPP can be combined.
Further studies will require more approaches using various terms of indices.
